Processes in Elixir are basic units of concurrency that form the foundation for various properties of a highly available system such as scalability, fault tolerance, resilience and seamless distribution. Code in Elixir runs inside processes and thousands of processes run in isolation and communicate with each other via messages to successfully run a highly available system. The Open Telecom Platform(OTP) is a framework that provides a lot of commonly used readily available abstractions built around processes that makes creating highly available applications much easier. This article explains what Elixir processes are, their internal memory structure, syntax, usage and their applications. Please note that Elixir processes are deeply rooted in the Erlang Virtual Machine (BEAM). Therefore, when we talk about Elixir processes in this article, we are implicitly discussing the underlying concurrent execution model inherited from Erlang.

Elixir processes are extremely lightweight and hence thousands of processes can be run efficiently in a machine. To understand how lightweight they are, let’s first understand the difference between OS processes, OS threads, virtual threads, Elixir processes and how all of these units of concurrent execution relate with running an Elixir application.

OS process
An OS process is a heavy weight fundamental unit of concurrency created and managed by the operating system. Every program or application that you start runs inside an OS process. Every OS process has its own memory space and every OS process can create and manage multiple OS threads within it. Since every OS process has its own memory space, it has strong isolation from other processes run by the OS. Since an OS process is created and managed by the OS directly, it takes up a considerable amount of memory and time to start an OS process. Applications like the Google Chrome browser use a separate OS process for each tab that you open. This provides isolation between tabs ensuring that problems in a single tab do not affect the other tabs as each underlying OS process that runs these tabs are strongly isolated. This isolation by OS processes in the Chrome browser comes with the cost of using up a lot of memory resources. Elixir applications run on the Beam VM and every time you start a Beam VM instance, it takes up a single OS process.

OS thread
An OS thread is a lighter unit of concurrency and execution in the operating system, that can be created within an OS process. It takes less time and memory to create and manage an OS thread. Each OS thread contains specific memory areas like the stack and register that can be used to run instructions independently from the other OS threads in the process. But all of the OS threads within an OS process share the data present in the OS process’s memory space. Hence, there is not as much isolation in OS threads present within an OS process. These threads can communicate easily with each other by using the shared memory space, but in order for multiple OS threads to read, access or modify the same data in the OS process’s shared memory space, synchronisation mechanisms such as locks and mutexes must be employed, making them difficult to deal with concurrent modification of shared data. Programming languages like Java use threads to handle concurrent requests while sharing the memory within the OS process. Each Java thread directly maps with an OS thread created within the OS process that runs the Java VM. The Beam VM that runs within an OS process creates a pool of OS threads that are used for handling different parts of the VM.

Virtual threads
Virtual threads are a lighter version of OS threads. Unlike OS threads that are created and managed by the OS, the virtual threads are created and managed by the runtime or the application itself, thus reducing the OS overhead. They are lighter than the OS threads and hence take up less memory and time to start up. The individual application or runtime defines the properties of these virtual threads such as their memory structure, communication mechanism, level of isolation etc and multiple virtual threads are created within an OS thread to obtain finer and lighter units of concurrency. Internally multiple virtual threads may still map to a particular OS thread. Various programming languages like Java, Ruby, Go etc offer lightweight concurrency via virtual threads as a part of the language or through libraries.

Elixir process
Elixir processes are similar to virtual threads but they are not exactly the same. The Beam VM creates and manages the Elixir processes. Unlike virtual threads which may be internally mapped to an OS thread, Elixir processes are not tied to any particular OS thread and are completely managed internally by the Beam VM. Elixir processes are strongly isolated as each process has its own memory space. The only way of communication between processes is through passing messages. This strong isolation forms the foundation for fault tolerance, as issues with one particular process do not affect the other running processes in the Beam VM. Each process takes a very small amount of initial memory and hence spawning a process is extremely fast since they do not require direct intervention from the OS.

Concurrency and Parallelism
Theoretically, the number of tasks or instructions that can be processed parallelly at a single point of time is restricted by the number of cores or CPUs present in a machine. Hence if your machine has four cores, then the number of tasks that be performed parallelly at a single point of time is 4, one for each core. But in a typical machine, there would be thousands of tasks and operations that would be required to be processed simultaneously. This is where concurrency comes in.

Concurrency involves allocating small chunks of time slices to different tasks that need to be performed. Each task is scheduled and is run for the provided time slice and then suspended, after which another task is then run in the same manner. This process of running a task, suspending it and picking up and running another task is called context switching. Context switching is done very fast so that it appears that all those tasks are being run simultaneously. Context switching also requires saving the state of a task before suspending it so that the next time it is scheduled for running, the previous saved state can be loaded to continue from where it left off.

Every unit of concurrency that we have seen above involves scheduling, and for OS processes and OS threads, the OS handles the scheduling and context switching, while for virtual threads and Elixir processes, the runtime or application manages scheduling and context switching. Thus concurrency allows for the execution of multiple tasks in overlapping time intervals, while parallelism involves multiple tasks being run at the same time, simultaneously by using multiple CPU cores.

Beam VM has its own scheduler within it and by default it employs one scheduler per core, with each scheduler mapped to an OS thread run within the Beam VM OS process. These schedulers make sure that multiple processes are queued in run queues and scheduled for execution, thus utilising all of the CPU cores present in the machine. This is how the Beam VM employs both concurrency and parallelism to run thousands of processes in a machine. The Beam VM also uses separate threads or mechanisms for I/O operations so that the execution of processes is not affected. Furthermore Beam VM uses preemptive multitasking, where the scheduler has the control to suspend processes at will and perform context switching of processes after a provided time window, ensuring that processes that have long running tasks do not block execution of other processes.

In Beam VM, the execution time slice for a process is determined by a reduction/function call limit. Once a process starts execution and crosses the allocated reduction limit, context switching will be performed by the scheduler to run another process. This is how Elixir enables responsiveness of an application. Unlike OS processes and OS threads, context switching in Elixir processes is much faster and requires a minimum amount of state to be stored and loaded. Elixir’s immutability property also plays a major role in enabling concurrency and parallelism by simplifying state management and providing thread safety. Even though immutability takes a toll on performance by creating new versions of data every time a piece of data is modified, it is a required trade off for achieving a high level of concurrency.
